Create a guide to build environments in NeMo Gym (#711)
NVIDIA-NeMo/Gym: docs/tutorials/nemo-gym-environment-guide/architecture-and-concepts.md

(building-environments-architecture)=

# Architecture and Core Concepts

> This section covers NeMo Gym's architecture and the foundational concepts you need before building environments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section translates NeMo Gym's architecture and foundational concepts into code. Read the {doc}/about/concepts, if you want to start with a conceptual overview.
```

---

## Overview: What is NeMo Gym?

NeMo Gym is a framework for building RL (Reinforcement Learning) environments designed specifically for training Large Language Models (LLMs). It provides a microservices-based architecture where environments (called **Resource Servers**) interact with LLM agents through well-defined HTTP APIs.

**Key characteristics:**
- **Microservices architecture**: Each component runs as an independent HTTP server
- **OpenAI-compatible APIs**: Uses the Responses API format for tool calling
- **Scalable**: Built as a modular, multi‑server system specifically designed for high‑throughput, parallel rollout collection across many environments and models.

> ### A Note on Terminology: Environments vs Resource Servers

Reviewer 2: Think this section is really useful. We should have this clarification in [here](https://docs.nvidia.com/nemo/gym/latest/about/concepts/core-components.html) when first introduce the concept

In NeMo Gym, **"Resource Server" and "Environment" are the same thing**. The codebase uses "Resource Server" to emphasize the microservices architecture, but functionally these serve the same role as environments in traditional RL frameworks.

| Traditional RL (OpenAI Gym) | NeMo Gym |
|----------------------------|----------|
| Environment (Python object) | Resource Server (HTTP microservice) |
| `env.step(action)` | `POST /{tool_endpoint}` |
| `env.reset()` | `POST /seed_session` |
| Reward from `step()` | Reward from `POST /verify` |

This naming is reflected in the codebase:
- The base class is `SimpleResourcesServer` (see `nemo_gym/base_resources_server.py:55-73`)
- All environments live in the `resources_servers/` directory
- Config types use `ResourcesServerTypeConfig` (see `nemo_gym/config_types.py:449`)

Throughout this guide, "environment" and "resource server" are used interchangeably.

---

## Architecture: The Three-Tier System

> NeMo Gym uses a three-tier microservices architecture:

Reviewer: This varies from our concepts architecture mental model. If kept as is we should make this link explicitly here with something like, "As described in [Core Components], a training environment has three parts: a Model, Resources, and an Agent. In code, these map to ResponsesAPIModel, ResourcesServer, and ResponsesAPIAgent. A fourth component — the HeadServer — handles configuration distribution and service discovery behind the scenes; we'll look at how it works in Section 7: Infrastructure."

Reviewer 2: agreed
